One way of controlling obesity is through the quantity and quality of food consumed during the day.

In the UAE, at least 70 per cent of men and 67 per cent of women aged 15 years and older are considered overweight. Today, on the Anti-Obesity Day, the aim is to raise awareness of obesity as a public health hazard.

When Mirhab S.'s doctor warned her of serious ill health in the coming days unless she lost weight, it got her really worried.

Weighing nearly 90kg, most of which she had gained over the years after moving to the UAE, Mirhab said she went along with the lifestyle and indulged in consuming junk food and be less active physically.

But such weight gain did not bode well for her. She soon started developing body aches, eating disorder and couldn't sleep well.

"It was a harrowing time for me. I had never felt unhealthier," she said. It was then she decided it was time to take action. And today 20 kilos lesser, she is half way through her journey.

And Mirhab isn't alone. In the UAE, at least 70 per cent of men and 67 per cent of women aged 15 years and older are considered overweight. Today, on the Anti-Obesity Day, the aim is to raise awareness of obesity as a public health hazard.

Nadina Andar Halabi, senior clinical dietitian, Emirates Hospital Wellness and Obesity Centre, said: "Obesity is a complex, multifaceted condition."

She said that one way of controlling obesity is through the quantity and quality of food consumed during the day.

"Losing weight is not about strict eating or any type of dieting. It's about eating healthy throughout most of the day in a mindful and intuitive way. We have to include food from various food groups such as fruits, vegetables, fibre-rich carbs, lean protein from animal and vegetarian origin, good fats, and dairy (if there are no existing allergies or intolerances)" she said.

Dr Ruchika, Mukherjee, associate medical director, MENA at Cigna Global Wellbeing Solutions, said: "Our chronic case management programme exposes us to a large number of insured members struggling to manage chronic conditions such as obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.

"The importance of adopting a proactive approach cannot be emphasised enough here, because a lot of chronic illnesses are more a result of improper lifestyle choices than anything else; with each being pre-disposing factors to the other. Obesity, for example, if left untreated, can serve as a pre-disposing factor to other diseases like high blood pressure and diabetes," she said.

Art Cozad, CEO for Middle East Markets, Cigna, added: "A good insurance plan is a critical element of this support system as it provides access to regular health examinations and a wider range of healthcare specialists."

The UAE findings from 2017 Cigna 360° Wellbeing Survey revealed that one in five respondents tend to delay necessary health checks. This is almost counter-intuitive in a society where chronic conditions are clearly on the rise.

asmaalizain@khaleejtimes.com

Parents can bring a change This World Anti-Obesity Day, experts are calling for parents to introduce more exercise and healthy eating into their children's daily lives to prevent the emerging obesity epidemic in the region, and help prevent the psychological effects of obesity. Childhood obesity has emerged as a major health challenge around the globe affecting more than 41 million children worldwide, and forecasted to reach 70 million by 2025 if current trends continue. The effects of obesity extend to the community and finances of the country and it is currently costing the UAE, $6 billion per year. The psychological effects of obesity are overwhelmingly evident, according to Bahee Van de Bor, Specialist Paediatric Dietitian at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (GOSH) in London, that treats children from the UAE.

"Overweight and obese children are likely to remain obese into adulthood and face problems such as depression and bullying, which can further decrease children's self-esteem and mental well-being," Van de Bor said.

She added that to avoid the psychological problems continuing into adulthood, it is important to tackle childhood obesity early.

Dr Lee Hudson, the consultant general paediatrician at GOSH, emphasised the severity of the problem stating that it is an emerging epidemic in the region and said that "issues with weight tend to build over time and they can go unnoticed by the family until the problems are established." Obesity has several effects on a child's health, now and in the future, and is a leading cause of death around the world. Obese children have an increased risk as adults for strokes, coronary artery disease, hypertension and diabetes, which will lead to a decreased quality of life and a shortened lifespan. "Losing weight is hard, and the treatment for being overweight is usually the same as the way to prevent it," said Dr Hudson, who is urging families in the Middle East to take action against childhood obesity.

Dr Hudson and Van De Bor agree that the support network around the child can play a key role in the prevention or treatment of obesity.

Children need around 60 minutes of exercise a day which can be split between school and extra-curricular activities. Being active and eating healthy shouldn't feel like chores to the child and should be incorporated in an enjoyable way as simple as playing tag. asmaalizain@khaleejtimes.com

Asma Ali Zain Associated with KT for 15 years. Covers health issues, Pakistan community, human interest stories as well as general topics for daily news or features.

Share





More >







Vote



Click/tap here to subscribe to Khaleej Times news alerts on WhatsApp. Make sure you save the phone number under Contacts on your phone for uninterrupted service.

ERROR: Macro /ads/dfp-ad-article-new is missing!