Filed on April 16, 2017 | Last updated on April 16, 2017 at 12.14 am

World Health Organisation's most comprehensive report on diabetes shows there are now 422 million people with the condition worldwide.

Research has shown that around one in every three pregnant women in the UAE develop diabetes during pregnancy. A test on the serum pregnancy-associated plasma can be a predictor for risk of gestational diabetes mellitus among pregnant women in the UAE, according to a research carried out in the country.

Professor Kadyam Gomathi, department of biochemistry at Gulf Medical University (GMU), who conducted the research said that the UAE suffers from a high prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) associated with poor outcomes for both mother and fetus. "Identifying pregnant women at risk for GDM and taking appropriate measures can reduce the risks."

The study that has been funded by Al Jalila Foundation, researched the association of pregnancy-associated plasma protein (PAPP-A) levels in the first trimester of pregnancy with the subsequent development of gestational diabetes. In 2015, Al Jalila Foundation spent Dh1.09 million on research on diabetes alone. Funds raised from Landmark Group's Beat Diabetes initiative over the last four years have also contributed to research conducted by Al Jalila Foundation.

Women from the 11th to13th week of pregnancy were enrolled in the study. Known diabetes mellitus patients and women with other obstetric complications were excluded from the study. At 24 to 28 weeks the women were screened for gestational diabetes. Researchers at the newly established Thumbay Institute of Precision Medicine and Translational Research at the GMU, in collaboration with other institutions, will also be studying the changes at the genomic level using latest technologies including high-resolution micro-arrays and next-generation sequencing.

Diabetes has been a growing concern for this region and the World Health Organisation's (WHO) most comprehensive report on diabetes shows there are now 422 million people with the condition worldwide.

This includes about 43 million in the eastern Mediterranean region, which, for the purposes of the report, extends to the UAE. Nearly a million of those are in the UAE.

The UAE has declared that it is determined to reduce incidences of the disease from 19 per cent of the population to 16 per cent by 2021.

'Diabetes check is vital during pregnancy'

Professor Kadyam Gomathi, department of Biochemistry at Gulf Medical University (GMU), spoke exclusively to Khaleej Times highlighting the issue of gestational diabetes and its effect on the mother and unborn baby. She had conducted research on the high prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus in the UAE. Excerpts from the interview:

Does gestational diabetes develop due to genetic factors or due to a diet taken by the mother?

There is definitely a genetic predisposition for developing gestational diabetes and it seems to involve many genes. Women who develop gestational diabetes in pregnancy have more risk for developing gestational diabetes in subsequent pregnancies as well as diabetes mellitus later in life. However, it is important to understand the role of a diet since maintaining a pre-pregnancy body weight in the normal range and controlled weight gain during pregnancy can prevent gestational diabetes from developing and if developed, minimise the harmful effects to the mother and her unborn child.

What steps can be taken before pregnancy to avoid gestational diabetes?

Maintaining a normal body weight before pregnancy is a very important step to avoid gestational diabetes since being overweight or obese increases the risk for gestational diabetes. Further, a routine screening test for any pre-existing diabetes mellitus can also be done especially if there has been gestational diabetes in the previous pregnancy.

Are there any statistics available on the number of women in the UAE who develop gestational diabetes?

Yes, there have been reports in literature on prevalence of GDM in the UAE. However, since the criteria used to diagnose gestational diabetes are different among different investigators, statistics vary.

The prevalence of gestational diabetes using the latest criteria for diagnosis varies between 28 to 37 per cent of pregnant women. To understand it better, it can be said that around 1 in 3 pregnant women in UAE develops diabetes during pregnancy.

What is the impact of gestational diabetes on the unborn child and even after birth?

This is a very important question and a lot of research is currently focusing on this aspect. Earlier it was thought that the effects of gestational diabetes on the unborn child were only limited to the newborn in that the baby is large in size, there are more complications during delivery and there is risk for hypoglycemia in the baby after delivery. However, newer research suggests that there are many long-term effects including risk of the child being obese and developing diabetes later in life. This is not only due to the genes passed on by the parents but is thought to be due to the epigenetic changes that occur in the DNA of the unborn child due to the diabetic environment in the womb.

Tests to detect gestational diabetes:

>Testing for any undiagnosed pre-existing diabetes should be done at the first prenatal visit

>Screening at 24-28 weeks of gestation should be done in all pregnant women.

>Testing for persistent diabetes at 4-12 weeks' after delivery.

>Women with gestational diabetes should be screened every three years for diabetes after the delivery.

>Women with gestational diabetes mellitus if found to have pre-diabetes should receive lifestyle interventions or metformin for prevention.

As recommended by American Diabetes Association

asmaalizain@khaleejtimes.com

Share





More >







Vote



Click/tap here to subscribe to Khaleej Times news alerts on WhatsApp. Make sure you save the phone number under Contacts on your phone for uninterrupted service.

ERROR: Macro /ads/dfp-ad-article-new is missing!